what's the extent of US military aid to
Israel in its war on Gaza Washington has
been sending military assets to the
region saying they're for deterrence
purposes but are they really and could
it trigger a wider conflict in the
Middle East this is Inside
[Music]
Story
hello again I'm James Bay refugee camps
hospitals apartment blocks nowhere in
gazer is safe in Israel's bombardment of
the besieged territory the humanitarian
needs are dire and growing by the minute
yet Israel's biggest Ally the United
States is still not calling for a
ceasefire instead it's sending more
military assets to the region Washington
says the aircraft carriers and Naval
support vessels will serve as a
deterrent but could American troops join
the War and what would this mean for the
Middle East plenty for us to discuss
with our panel in a bit but first this
report from
[Applause]
[Music]
saril a grim Milestone 18 days into the
war on Gaza the Israeli bombardment has
killed more than
5,700
Palestinians daily life in the besieged
territory is synonymous with the
unpredictability of air strikes but
throughout the offensive the United
States has maintained an unwavering
commitment to Israel we must must be
Crystal Clear we stand with
Israel we stand with
Israel and we will make sure Israel has
what it needs to take care of its
citizens defend itself and respond to
this attack while international calls
for an immediate ceasefire grow louder
ceas ceas
now the Us and other Western allies have
refrained from asking Israel to SC Gil
back its attacks on Gaza instead
Washington has sent not one but two
aircraft carriers and their strike
groups to the region each has roughly
7,500 military personnel it's one of the
largest deployments of US troops to the
Mediterranean in
decades this additional uh
deployment um sends another message to
those who would who would uh seek to
widen this conflict President Biden said
earlier and as you've heard me say uh if
any group or any uh country is looking
to widen this conflict and take
advantage of this very unfortunate uh
situation that we see um Our advice is
don't Iran's foreign minister has
accused the White House of double
standards we've received messages asking
us to practice restraint and also asked
us to invite others to show restraint
but the us over the past 2 weeks has
been sending milit equipment to Israel
so how can they say they don't want the
expansion of War now I'm saying to Biden
stop your
hypocrisy the US hopes its support for
Israel and its own increased military
presence in the region will be enough to
prevent the conflict from widening but
it's also clear that any miscalculation
between Iran and the United States risks
changing the Dynamics of this war very
quickly Sara Gil for Inside
Story
[Music]
well let's bring in our panel of guests
to discuss all this further in Doha we
have Colin Clark who's director of
research at the sufan group a global
intelligence and Security consultancy in
New York it's Omar Raman he's a fellow
at the Middle East Council on global
Affairs where he focuses on Palestine
Middle East geopolitics and American
foreign policy in the region and in
Boston it's Glenn Carl Korea CIA officer
he's a former deputy National
intelligence officer for transnational
threats at the agency great to have you
all with us to discuss uh what is going
on in the region and particularly what's
going on with regard to the US
deployments because more and more uh us
assets are going to the region
particularly Naval assets some people
say it's the biggest Amada that's been
seen uh in the region since the 1990s
Glenn would you agree with
that well I don't know if that's true
but I certainly believe that it is uh
true two uh aircraft carriers bring
along as part of their combat
um I forget the the term steps my mind
for the moment but in any event they
deploy with probably a dozen ships or
more each so I think that's probably a
true statement yes and Colin I've been
looking it's quite hard quite opaque to
get information off the off the Pentagon
website but reading through all the
transcripts and everything that's out
there in public um as Glenn says I mean
we've got the largest warship in the
world world the USS Gerald Ford we've
got another um aircraft carrier so two
aircraft carriers the Dwight D
Eisenhower uh which is also there and
then I think a total of eight warships
in their two strike groups and then
we've got something called the batan
amphibious ready group uh which has on
three ships a total of 4,000 Sailors and
Marines on it this is this is a very
large deployment isn't it
Colin yeah it's a it's a massive
muscular response from Washington
multiple carrier strike groups uh you
know Patriot batteries fad missile
defense this is about we're not going to
allow any jug and just tell me what fat
is please
quickly terminal high altitude air
defense uh missile missile defense
essentially uh Force protection uh
deterrence uh and then if need be some
uh potential offensive assets there's
also intelligence surveillance and
reconnaissance uh on these carrier
strike groups as well so all around
preparation from Washington in case
things do escalate and Colin staying
with you what is your reading of the
main reason for sending so much uh to
the
region I think you know first of all
it's deterrence it's a warning to the
Iranians it's a warning to Iranian
sponsored groups like Hezbollah to
remain on the sidelines or at least to
keep activity at a very low and
manageable level uh but again it's also
to protect the bases that the United
States have
in the region it's about Force
protection and lastly it's about
preparation uh the Biden Administration
is still stung from the withdrawal from
Afghanistan how poorly things went there
and they want to be prepared in case
they need these assets including to
evacuate American citizens from a number
of countries in the Middle East Omar let
me ask you how you think this will be
seen in the region because one person's
deterrence could be another person's
provocation yeah I think I think uh it
opinion on this will be split in the
region to some extent based on your
relationship with the United States and
where you're coming from and how you're
viewing the current uh conflict although
I think across the Arab world there is
heavy concern for this escalating and
you know in some senses uh maybe not a
provocation but certainly the US is is
escalating the situation by bringing in
hu huge Naval forces uh into the region
and it's in in a sense emboldening
Israel to carry on what it's doing in
Gaza and that is the obviously uh the
source of the escalation at the moment
that is the reason why there's anger
erupting across the Arab world that
would be the reason why you might see
attacks on uh US military bases in the
region uh or uh you know what we've seen
maybe uh houti Rebels firing Rockets
towards Israel if that's actually where
they were headed uh so you know at the
heart of it it's you know it's embold
Israel I think to carry out uh this
mission in the region Glen see if right
with my assumption here my assumption is
that uh they sending this big arada
because they can't use their military
bases of air base in Doha and their
naval base in Bahrain because of the
circumstances right now does that seem
correct to
you uh partially correct it certainly
would be a complicating factor to use
forces out of Doha given um Cutter's
relationship with Hamas and the and
Brotherhood uh however I don't think
that's really the primary reason I think
as I believe it's Colin the first
Speaker said uh clearly to me the
primary objective is deterrence
dissuasion the the buildup is not really
to um enable the Israelis to act but
rather to keep the conflict from
spreading becoming a regional or even
broader war and I think that most uh we
call them Arab governments but they're
in this instance it's more relevant to
say Muslim uh countries uh understand
that and and uh don't want to see the
conflict generalize and so really are
accepting of the US deployment now the
what we call the Arab street is another
matter and Muslims of course will be um
dissatisfied and angered by what they
will characterize as a provocation but
but to me clearly the objective of the
United States is to stop stop Iran's
proxies from so provoking Israel or the
United States that the conflict
generalizes into a wider
War Colin um we've talked about the
deterrence role but there's also a role
in protecting us assets that are already
in the region let me read you a quote
from the Pentagon Press Secretary breger
General Pat Ryder we will do everything
and take all necessary measures to
protect us forces we've already seen
some instances um W with regard to what
has gone on in the Red Sea and what has
happened in Iraq and Syria let me take
those one by one first in the Red Sea
there um there was a US warship the USS
Carney which took down four land attack
cruise missiles we think they came from
the houthis is that your
understanding yeah it seems likely uh
it's constant with previous behavior and
actions by the houthis and for the
United States it's just unacceptable
it's not going to allow its personel or
its basis to be targeted by any actor in
the region and and on that Colin um do
we know what the houthis were aiming at
because uh the U the Pentagon spokesman
again said they took them down but they
didn't necessarily think they were aimed
at the Cary and they were going in the
direction of Israel to your knowledge do
the houthis have anything that could hit
Israel it's possible I think you know
they they very well could have been
headed that way uh I think you know one
thing that this whole conflict has
taught us is that we need to question
prior assumptions right I think uh many
people didn't think Kamas had the
capabilities that it displayed on
October 7th so I would be very concerned
about uh examining prior assumptions
about the capabilities of Hezbollah the
houthis Iraqi Shia militia and others I
think you know clearly the Iranians have
helped them develop capabilities they've
given them all sorts of uh different
hardware and missiles and so so uh at
this at this point uh we're still in the
early stages of this conflict we're
hoping to keep it to a low boil uh it's
best to be in a defensive posture Glenn
we've also seen attacks in Syria and
Iraq there are still based in Iraq 2,500
US troops and in Syria there are 900 uh
US troops but also a lot of military
contractors I mean I think some people
to start with would be quite surprised
there AR so many US troops still in Iraq
and Syria what are they
doing well multiple uh missions one of
course is to continue uh to observe and
try to stop um Isis or jihadist uh
groups and elements from uh conducting
uh terrorist operations and
destabilizing things another is to help
try to keep the governments in place
from being destabilized further by such
terrorist actions and the third is of
course to watch over to the extent
possible um Iranian efforts to extend
its influence which is a large component
of what we're seeing happening with the
houti with the groups in Syria with um
hisbah on the border and with Hamas uh
and Iran is playing a cynical very
dangerous game destabilization and
trouble death and turmoil in Israel is a
good thing for for Iran because it's
hostile to Israel on theological
philosophical and political reasion and
two because it helps Iran extend its
influence so the one of the missions of
the US presence there is to try to keep
this kind of destabilization from
occurring uh and uh really to stop Shia
meaning Iranian uh influence from uh
from spreading even further than it has
Omar apparently we think about eight
attacks on US troops in four different
locations in Iraq and Syria and it's
interesting reading what's been said by
the US hierarchy uh quoted the Pentagon
press secretary before we don't
necessarily see that Iran has explicitly
ordered them yet the White House and the
uh strategic Communications coordinator
John Kirby we know that Iran is closely
monitoring these attacks and in some
cases actively facilitating these
attacks what's your view on how involved
Iran is is Iran ordering
this uh whether they're ordering the
attacks uh in places like Syria and Iraq
I mean it's it's probable given their
links uh to uh to those uh those groups
that are operating in those countries I
think it was a little overstated I think
in in terms of uh you know their their
connection to the initial Hamas attack
on October 7th I mean clearly they're
you know a sponsor a financial backer
material backer of Hamas but you know
they a lot of the reporting that came up
out out of October 7th you know implied
or directly asserted that you know Iran
was heavily involved in the planning
process I think that uh is overstating
the overstating the connection but
certainly I think uh their connection is
much deeper uh to the armed groups that
are operating in Syria and Iraq uh and
so you know I you know I don't know
whether they're directly involved but
it's uh you know worth it's worth
considering for sure okay back to you
Colin because you brought up the acronym
Fad in the first place what the US is
deploying it seems because of these
specific attacks
in Iraq and Syria is this terminal high
altitude area defense system or Thad and
also some additional and there's no
specified number here Patriot battalions
also just explain to me what these
things
do uh Patriot are missile missile
defense batteries surface to a missiles
that are going to be used to guard
against what we saw uh just the other
day against the numerous attacks and
provocations from uh various Iranian
back actors in the region
the United States and the Pentagon
clearly expects more of that in the days
ahead uh and so this is again a
defensive and precautionary measure to
protect United States assets it's it's
nothing more it's nothing less uh the
Iranians for their part are doing what
they always do they're continuing to
attempt to push uh the United States out
of the region and extend their own
influence Glenn we've got 2,000 extra
troops in addition to those Marines I
told you about who are at
um and all the other Naval Personnel
2,000 extra US troops are on standby to
deploy with high Readiness I mean is
that what are the circumstances in which
these troops could actually do something
because one assumes you deploy troops
yes you deploy them as a deterrent but
you have to think about where you when
you might use them and there might be
circumstances when they could be used
what would you say to
that oh this is where the line is not
easy to draw very clearly but I think
the example of the Carney gives a good
indication uh the video that I think
numbers of us have seen which purports
to be taken from the hooti who fired the
rocket to um an untutored eye such as
mine it appeared that it was firing at
the ship and you could hear the people
saying well essentially let's see what
America does to that and take it America
but the response for the US was to to
shoot down the missile and then to say
it had occurred and do nothing else uh
in other
circumstances the military the United
States would want to eliminate the
threat the perpetrator of an attack like
that but it hasn't happened why because
it seems pretty clear that uh the
description of the Thad system that we
just heard from Colin I think it was um
make describes what US objectives are
which is to Parry um attacks and to keep
the violence the war from spreading if
however ever US forces and Facilities
were seriously harmed um Americans
killed and and capabilities destroyed
then it would be much more difficult for
the United States not to use the 20000
um soldiers Marines I think they are who
are in place as a dissuasive measure
they are there not to be used the
success is not to see them have to be
deployed uh failure of American
objectives would be that the Iranian
proxy succeed in causing such harm that
the US or Israel would feel obliged to
respond with uh with Force rather than
just uh countermeasures Omar so if the
US are attacked that is what the forces
are there for and might and that's when
they might actually be used do you see
any other circumstances where these
forces could be deployed given how
uncertain things are with regard to the
war on Gaza and a possible escalation in
the north bringing in
Hezbollah yeah I think the the primary
reason for them being there and this was
obviously mentioned uh is you know or
the primary maybe cause of escalation
would be if US forces were attacked but
I think if there was a massive assault
on Israel say hasah was to fire you know
thousands of rockets into Israel you
might see the United States respond and
I think that's obviously part of the
reason it's there I mentioned earlier
you know it's enabling the Israelis
obviously you know I didn't want to
imply that the US was seeking escalation
uh in the region the carrier forces are
there to deter uh but obviously you know
that type of deterrence uh is read by
Israel as a kind of a license to do what
it wants and that can cause spark a type
of escalation so if it does come from
Lebanon uh or if it comes from elsewhere
Iran or Syria or Iraq in kind of a
massive scale something that can't be uh
you know handled with minimal effort
then I could see the US getting involved
in this and that's a very slippery slope
and a dangerous uh a dangerous
Colin to you quickly I mean are there
other possible roles given you've got
all of these Naval assets there let me
give you some examples could could there
be a role for them in extraction of US
citizens who are being held captive
could there be a role in intelligence
and surveillance and whatever for Israel
I mean I assume they have quite a lot of
capabilities in that regard and could
there be a base for some sort of covert
action by Special
Forces look the troops are are not
purely ornamental they're there for a
reason uh again I think this is largely
about preparation uh this is about the
possibility of a Neo a non-combatant
evacuation operation uh getting US
citizens out of the region if need be uh
logistical support you mentioned intell
intelligence surveillance and
reconnaissance uh I think you know as a
very very last resort you know the US
would use them in a kinetic way uh but
really the United States does not want
to get involved in this conflict this is
purely about escalation management uh
and these are the assets that are being
brought into theater to achieve that
Glenn we've talked about the possibility
of the northern front becoming a second
front a twoof front War some have even
talked about the West Bank being a third
front um and we've talked about the
possibility of Hezbollah getting
involved in this conflict actively but
there are also reports that the Israeli
defense M Minister yoav Galant has
advocated a preemptive strike in the
north against Hezbollah who he says he
10 more times more dangerous than Hamas
and so far he's not won the argument um
in the Israeli War cabinet but if Israel
would do that that puts the us then in a
very difficult position doesn't it if if
it's Israel that starts the fight in the
north well it could possibly be the case
yes it depend it would depend everything
always depends on the size of a quote
preemptive strike and and that the uh
amount of uh damage killing that are
caused it's certainly true hisbah in
conventional military terms is U
exponentially more powerful than Hamas
and uh we all have I think heard the
reports that that Iran has
provided hisbah with 120 to 140,000
Rockets many of which can uh strike any
part of Israel there their range extends
well beyond the borders of the furthest
point away of Israel uh so Israel has a
um a real legitimate um concern about uh
it is an attack uh from our assessments
imminent and uh would it be less
dangerous to preemptively strike to try
to stop that or not and and that's an a
very difficult equation so far uh
consistently the Israelis have shown
restraint because they don't want to
expand the war either uh but that is the
the very complex equation that one has
to make in real time when all decisions
have negative
consequences uh if if you go right it's
negative if you go left it's negative um
and yet you have to go some direction
it's the uh the hard challenge they have
but that certainly is why they would be
considering a preemptive strike in the
seemingly
paradoxical objective of limiting uh
harm certainly but uh expansion of the
conflict uh actually Colin how much um
restraint does the US have an ability to
restrain Israel if it want I've read
reports that there now is a us uh
Lieutenant General James Glenn who
previously headed the marine Special
Operations was involved in the
operations against isil in Iraq he's
been embedded now in the Comm structure
uh at the defense Ministry in Tel
Aviv well it's unclear uh how much the
United States can limit the israeli's
response I do think uh Israel will
listen to us advisors and again I think
the United States has little interest in
watching this conflict escalate uh and
has zero interest in getting dragged
into it so I think uh the United States
is over there providing advice hoping
that cooler heads prevail let's not
forget at the human suffering involved
here the hostages uh that are involved
and the children that are dying every
day in this conflict this is
heart-wrenching to watch I think anybody
with a heart is is hoping that uh that
this war ends sooner rather than later
and I hope uh the United States is
helping figure out a way to bring the
fighting to an end Omar major military
power projection like this also has a
global diplomatic effect how do you
think this will be seen this us troop
presence in the region by Russia and
China um you know a little difficult to
say Obviously China has warships in the
region that have been there for a while
but are kind of making a tour so that uh
Dynamic I think U creates a certain type
of tension uh that we you know we don't
want to see escalate into into that
Arena um how those powers are perceiving
it uh it's difficult to say but I do
know that um you know how this has
evolved and if if the Biden
Administration you know didn't didn't
want to see uh escalation and I don't
think it does but it's its reflexive uh
reaction to this whole episode uh from
day one has brought us to this point and
if you didn't think it would bring us to
this this point uh then you know then
this was a a huge mistake on its end to
think that you know an Israeli uh
bombardment of the Gaza Strip without a
real plan uh for the day after wouldn't
bring us to this point and so uh you
know the whole thing has been a kind of
a dangerous Reckless game uh that's
escalating tensions in the region and I
don't think anybody really wants to see
it evolve into something much worse but
that's kind of the direction we're
headed in Glenn can I end our discussion
with get your reaction to a grim
anniversary that just passed 40 years
ago it was October the 23rd 1983 that's
when a suicide bomber hit the US
military barracks in Beirut
International Airport killing 241 US
servicemen um that was a disastrous
moment in the US's involvement in the
Middle East and of course now the
president is Joe Biden he not only knows
his history he lives it because he was a
US senator at the time he said we've got
to change this crazy policy as he
introduced a resolution calling from the
US withdrawal uh from leban what's your
thought on on that Echo from
history some of my colleagues were
killed in the the attacks the Marine
Barracks and the American Embassy which
occurred not far distant in time from
each other
one of the lessons that the us some
parts of the US uh Learned was the
primary reason for those two attacks was
that we were seen to have been seen to
have taken sides in fundamentally a
civil war but also in between the pal
Palestine Liberation Organization and
Israel and so we uh angered one of the
sides enough to to try to kill us uh a
tactical lesson that we learned was that
The Rules of Engagement of the American
forces deployed at the time were
designed to uh avoid escalation which is
a laudable objective but it meant that
the uh the response in real time was
insufficient meaning that some of our
guards were not allowed to fire on an
approaching suicide truck and those
Rules of Engagement subsequently changed
and I think in the current crisis it is
relevant because we've all been talking
about during this section session is the
advanced deployment of tremendous force
and the repeated warnings that the
United States will use it if uh provoked
uh if someone tries to expand the uh the
conflict uh that's a l
Glen thank you very much for that lesson
from history uh for all the talk of a
pivot to Asia it seems the US is being
forced by events back to to the Middle
East thanks to all our guests Colin
Clark Omar Ramen and Glenn Carl you can
find much more detail on the conflict on
our website and if you want to watch
this or any other of our programs go to
al.com if you have your own opinions on
what you just heard then post them on
our Facebook page that's
facebook.com/ AJ insidestory we'd also
like to hear you from you too on X
formerly Twitter where we are at AJ
inside story from me James Bay and
everyone on the team here in doas stay
safe and bye for now